[EN] add Runtime (#2033)
cncf/glossary: content/en/runtime.md

---
title: Runtime
status: Feedback Appreciated
category: concept

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: ["", "", ""]
---
```
We'll need to add the appropriate tags from [this list](https://glossary.cncf.io/style-guide/#tags)

Reviewer 2: I suggest `application`

## What it is

> In cloud-native computing, "runtime" refers to the environment where applications or services run. It includes the necessary components and resources to make software work in a cloud-native setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/) computing, runtime refers to the environment where applications or services run. It includes the necessary components and resources to make software work in a cloud native setup.
```

## Problem it addresses

> Traditional software applications often faced challenges when being deployed and executed in distributed environments, such as cloud platforms. These challenges include managing dependencies, scaling resources, handling failures, and ensuring consistent behavior across different environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traditional software applications often face challenges when deployed and executed in distributed environments like cloud platforms. 
These challenges include managing dependencies, scaling resources, handling failures, and ensuring consistent behavior across different environments.
```

 

## How it helps

> Runtime in cloud-native computing helps address these challenges by providing a standardized and containerized execution environment. It abstracts away the underlying infrastructure details, enabling applications to be deployed and run consistently across different cloud platforms or environments. The runtime environment includes features like container orchestration, automatic scaling, service discovery, and fault tolerance, which simplify the deployment, management, and scaling of applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runtime helps address these challenges by providing a standardized and containerized execution environment. 
It [abstracts](/abstraction/) away the underlying infrastructure details, enabling applications to be deployed and run consistently across different cloud platforms or environments. 
The runtime environment includes features like [container orchestration](container-orchestration/), automatic [scaling](/auto-scaling/), service discovery, and fault tolerance, simplifying the deployment, management, and scaling of applications.
```

> By leveraging a cloud-native runtime, developers can focus on building and shipping applications without worrying about the specific infrastructure details. It provides portability, scalability, and resilience, allowing applications to dynamically adapt to changing conditions and handle increased workloads efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A runtime allows developers to focus on building and shipping applications without worrying about specific infrastructure details. 
It provides [portability](/portability/), scalability, and resilience, allowing applications to dynamically adapt to changing conditions and handle increased workloads efficiently.
```

---
title: Runtime
status: Feedback Appreciated
category: concept
---

## What it is

> In [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/) computing, runtime refers to the environment where applications or services run. It includes the necessary components and resources to make software work in a cloud native setup.

Reviewer: Great call. It's a small change, so I'll commit myself.

## Problem it addresses

Traditional software applications often face challenges when deployed and executed in distributed environments like cloud platforms. 
These challenges include managing dependencies, scaling resources, handling failures, and ensuring consistent behavior across different environments.
 

## How it helps

> Runtime helps address these challenges by providing a standardized and containerized execution environment. 

Reviewer 2: I think the `runtime` can refer to the execution environment in the container _itself_ when referred to in the context of a containerized environment (like Docker or K8s), subtly different from _providing_ it.

Reviewer 2: Would something like this work:
```suggestion
Runtime, as the standardized and containerized execution environment, helps address these challenges.
```

Reviewer: As a technical reviewer, it's your and @iamNoah1's call :) 
Our goal is to be accurate without overcomplicating it.  So, oversimplifying something a little to make it easier to grasp can be ok, for example.

Reviewer 2: @iamNoah1 I think I'm ok with the original phrasing, but as I'm still new on this project would like a second opinion :)

Reviewer 2: I think the section may work better if we remove this line completely.

---
title: Runtime

> status: Feedback Appreciated

Reviewer: We are  almost done, so changing this to completed 
```suggestion
status: Completed
```

category: concept
tags: ["application", "", ""]
---

## What it is

A runtime, in general, executes a piece of software.
It is an [abstraction](/abstraction/) of the underlying operating system that translates the program's commands into respective actions for the operating system. 

In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), _runtime_ generally refers to container runtime. 
A container runtime specifically implements the [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/) specification to ensure consistent handling around the ecosystem. 

## Problem it addresses

Without the abstraction of a container runtime, the application would have to deal with all the mechanics of each operating system, increasing the complexity of running the app. 

## How it helps
Container runtimes are a necessary component of container orchestrators such as Kubernetes. 

> They handle the container lifecycle, which does mainly two things.

Reviewer: I accepted your suggestion, @iamNoah1, but I changed the 2nd part of this sentence. You list three things. Is that what container lifecycle is mainly about? Can we say three?

---
title: Runtime
status: Feedback Appreciated
category: concept
tags: ["application", "", ""]
---

## What it is

A runtime, in general, executes a piece of software.
It is an [abstraction](/abstraction/) of the underlying operating system that translates the program's commands into respective actions for the operating system. 

In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), _runtime_ generally refers to container runtime. 
A container runtime specifically implements the [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/) specification to ensure consistent handling around the ecosystem. 
This includes container image specifications, how the runtime can retrieve images,
and how these images are unpacked, layered, mounted, and executed. 

## Problem it addresses

Without the abstraction of a container runtime, the application would have to deal with all the mechanics of each operating system, increasing the complexity of running the app. 

## How it helps
Container runtimes are a necessary component of container orchestrators such as Kubernetes. 
They handle the container lifecycle, meaning X, Y, and Z.

> Runtimes also manage hardware resources and automate [??], taking care of all these operating system-level actions. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
SeconRuntimes also manage hardware resources and automate [??], taking care of all these operating system-level actions. 
```
```suggestion
Second, they handle how these images are unpacked, layered, mounted, and executed.
Furthermore, runtimes manage hardware resources taking care of all these operating system-level actions. 
These include resource allocation and isolation.  
```

---
title: Runtime
status: Feedback Appreciated
category: concept
tags: ["application", "", ""]
---

## What it is

A runtime in general is something that executes a piece of software. 
It can be seen as an abstraction of the underlying operating system that knows how to translate the commands of the program into respective actions on the operating system level. 

In [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/) computing, when we talk about the runtime we refer to the container runtime. A container runtime specifically implements the [Open Container Inititative](https://opencontainers.org/) specification to ensure consistent consumption around the ecosystem. This includes the container image specification, the method in which the runtime can retrieve an image, and how that image is unpacked, layered, mounted, and executed. These runtimes utilize kernel features such as namespaces and cgroups to provide isolation and resource management for the containers.

> Container runtimes read the specification [configuration files](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/glossary.md#configuration) from a [bundle](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/glossary.md#bundle), and use that information to create a [container](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/glossary.md#container), launches a process inside the container, and performs other [lifecycle actions](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/runtime.md).

Reviewer 4: Should I just cut out line 15?

> Container runtimes read the specification [configuration files](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/glossary.md#configuration) from a [bundle](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/glossary.md#bundle), and use that information to create a [container](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/glossary.md#container), launches a process inside the container, and performs other [lifecycle actions](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/main/runtime.md).

Reviewer 3: Yeah I think that would be good.

> Common runtimes include containerd, CRI-O, Docker, Firecracker, gVisor, lxd, Podman, and runc. 

Reviewer 4: Ok I'll cut it out.

cgroups, etc.

## Problem it addresses

> Container runtimes are a necessary component of container orchestrators such as Kubernetes. The runtime is scoped to only handle the lifecycle of the containers. User-facing features such as scaling and service discovery, fault tolerance, etc. are handled by the orchestrator or some other high level tool that interfaces with the runtime. 

Reviewer 4: Ok added more changes, thanks!

## How it helps

The container runtimes are responsible for launching, managing, and terminating containers. Many runtimes, like LXC, LMCTFY, and rkt predate the creation of the OCI Specification. Over time the OCI Specification has become the standard for container runtimes. 

> This allows a diverse set of container runtimes to be used with different tools. For example Kubernetes can use OCI compliant runtimes via it's container runtime interface, giving end users the flexibility of using a specific runtime. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This gives end users the flexibility of using a specific container runtime that suits their needs best, 
as long as they use a product that can use OCI compliant container runtimes (like Kubernetes) 
and a specific container runtime that actually is OCI compliant. 
```

Tried to be more specific here.

---

## What it is

A runtime, in general, executes a piece of software.
It is an [abstraction](/abstraction/) of the underlying operating system that translates the program's commands into respective actions for the operating system. 

In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), _runtime_ generally refers to container runtime. 
A container runtime specifically implements the [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/) specification to ensure consistent handling around the ecosystem. 
This includes container image specifications, how the runtime can retrieve images,
and how these images are unpacked, layered, mounted, and executed. 
These runtimes utilize kernel features such as namespaces and cgroups to provide isolation and resource management for the containers.

## Problem it addresses

Without a container runtime, the user would have to manually handle the container lifecycle, interface directly with cgroups and namespaces in the kernel, and handle hardware resources.
The container runtime acts as an abstraction layer for these features.

## How it helps
Container runtimes are a necessary component of container orchestrators such as Kubernetes. 

> They handle the container lifecycle, meaning X, Y, and Z.

Reviewer: This was accepted by X, Y, and Z was a placeholder for what it actually does :)

---
title: Runtime
status: Feedback Appreciated
category: concept
tags: ["application", "", ""]
---

## What it is

> A runtime in general is something that executes a piece of software. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A runtime, in general, is something that executes a piece of software.
```

> A runtime, in general, is something that executes a piece of software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A runtime, in general, executes a piece of software.
```

Reviewer 2: I was considering this edit too, I think you're right, let's remove it.

> It is an abstraction of the underlying operating system that knows how to translate the program's commands into respective actions on the operating system level. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is an [abstraction](/abstraction/) of the underlying operating system that translates the program's commands into respective actions on the operating system. 
```
Do we need "level?" It confused me a bit. As far as I understood, an abstraction layer will execute things for the app without the app needing to know what's happening behind the "abstraction curtain." So it's simply executing on the app's behalf. 

Also, does it go both ways or just from the app to the OS?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is an [abstraction](/abstraction/) of the underlying operating system that translates the program's commands into respective actions for the operating system. 
```

If we're taking out the reference to level, then it wouldn't be "on the" anymore. Good call linking out to abstraction.

> Also, does it go both ways or just from the app to the OS?

I think info would go both ways, but I'm not sure we need to explain that here.

> It can be seen as an abstraction of the underlying operating system that knows how to translate the commands of the program into respective actions on the operating system level. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is an abstraction of the underlying operating system that knows how to translate the program's commands into respective actions on the operating system level. 
```

> In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), we refer to the container runtime when we talk about the _runtime_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), _runtime_ generally refers to container runtime. 
```

> In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), when we talk about the runtime we refer to the container runtime. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the context of [cloud native](/cloud-native-apps/), we refer to the container runtime when we talk about the _runtime_. 
```

> A container runtime specifically implements the [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/) specification to ensure consistent handling around the ecosystem. 

Reviewer: What does "consistent handling around the ecosystem" mean?

Author: it means that the containers follow the OCI Specified rules that allows containers to work smoothly with different types of runtimes

Reviewer 3: @CathPag is it more clear now, also taking the following text into consideration?

Reviewer: Yeah, I don't like tech stack, but ecosystem sounds wrong. Ecosystem is more than just technology and I think you refer to the technologies on the landscape. Maybe a different word?

Reviewer 3: After thinking about it, maybe Container Orchestrators might be suitable.
```suggestion
A container runtime specifically implements the [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/) specification to ensure consistent handling around different container orchestration technologies. 
```

> This includes the container image specification, the method by which the runtime can retrieve an image, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes container image specifications, how the runtime can retrieve images,
```
The plural is better?

> This includes the container image specification, the method in which the runtime can retrieve an image, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This includes the container image specification, the method by which the runtime can retrieve an image, 
```

> and how that image is unpacked, layered, mounted, and executed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and how these images are unpacked, layered, mounted, and executed. 
```

These runtimes utilize kernel features such as namespaces and cgroups to provide isolation and resource management for the containers.

## Problem it addresses

> Container runtimes are a necessary component of container orchestrators such as Kubernetes. 

Reviewer: This entire paragraph talks about how it helps, not the problem it addresses. It's so easy to fall into that trap. Remember I told you? We immediately think of the solution. 

Should we just move it down?

Reviewer 2: > This entire paragraph talks about how it helps, not the problem it addresses. It's so easy to fall into that trap. Remember I told you? We immediately think of the solution.

You are absolutely right 😅

Moving it down may work out well. The first sentence of the next section is somewhat awkward, and replacing it with this section might be a nice solution.

The runtime is scoped to only handle the lifecycle of the containers. 

> User-facing features such as scaling and service discovery, fault tolerance, etc. are handled by the orchestrator or some other high level tool that interfaces with the runtime. 

Reviewer 2: We use the term "handled" a lot in this text, maybe "managed" instead?
```suggestion
User-facing features, such as scaling and service discovery, fault tolerance, etc., are managed by the orchestrator or some other high-level tool that interfaces with the runtime.
```

> Without a container runtime, the user would have to manually handle the container lifecycle, interface directly with cgroups and namespaces in the kernel, and handle hardware resources.

Reviewer: I'm confused. If a runtime is an abstraction, wouldn't the problem be that the app would have to interface directly with the OS, and we'd need to ensure interoperability for all possible apps with all possible OSs, and that would be a headache?  As far as I understood, abstractions are not to automate things but to enable interoperability. To be clear, I never really new what a runtime is, so this is only based on my understanding of abstraction.

Reviewer 3: @akshatcoder-hash did you already add the simplification?! Instead of throwing in cgroups and namespaces and kernel, we could just say operating system.

Reviewer 3: @akshatcoder-hash did you already add the simplification?! Instead of throwing in cgroups and namespaces and kernel, we could just say operating system.

> Without a container runtime the user would have to manually handle container lifecycle, interface directly with cgroups and namespaces in the kernel, and handle hardware resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without a container runtime, the user would have to manually handle the container lifecycle, interface directly with cgroups and namespaces in the kernel, and handle hardware resources.
```

> The container runtime acts an abstraction layer for these features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The container runtime acts as an abstraction layer for these features.
```

## How it helps

> Container runtimes help to address this by taking care of all those low-level actions for us; 

Reviewer: Added "manage hardware resources from above in this section.
```suggestion
Runtimes also manage hardware resources and automate [??], taking care of all these operating system-level actions. 
```

> thus, they are responsible for launching, managing, and terminating containers.

Reviewer: Is this part of container lifecycle management? If so, we should list it above where the term in introduced.

Author: apologies for this one. will add in the further commit

Reviewer 3: would suggest to delete this sentence because we talk about it in this section saying that the runtime is responsible for the execution of containers.  
```suggestion
```

> Container runtimes help to address this by taking of all those low level actions for us, 
> thus they are responsible for launching, managing, and terminating containers. 

Reviewer 2: I thought I had submitted this edit earlier:
```suggestion
Container runtimes help to address this by taking care of all those low-level actions for us; 
thus, they are responsible for launching, managing, and terminating containers.
```

Over time different container runtime products evolved, leading to the OCI Specification, 
which became the standard for container runtimes. 

> This allows end users to use a specific container runtime that suits their needs best, 

Reviewer: This last sentence is very complex. I think it can be summarized in this:
```suggestion
Introducing this standard allows end users to combine any OCI-compliant runtime with any OCI-compliant container orchestrator (like Kubernetes). 
```

> This gives end users the flexibility of using a specific container runtime that suits their needs best, 

Reviewer 2: The phrase "This gives end users the flexibility of using..." is very similar to the last line in the first paragraph of [Frost & Sullivan](https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/frost--sullivan-applauds-interoutes-innovative-and-flexible-cloud-computing-service-integrated-into-its-pan-european-network-228726431.html)'s article.

```suggestion
This allows end users to use a specific container runtime that suits their needs best, 
```

> as long as they use a product that can use OCI-compliant container runtimes (like Kubernetes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> as long as they use a product that can use OCI compliant container runtimes (like Kubernetes) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as long as they use a product that can use OCI-compliant container runtimes (like Kubernetes)
```

> and a specific container runtime that is OCI-compliant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> and a specific container runtime that actually is OCI compliant. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and a specific container runtime that is OCI-compliant.
```
